enhance docs for rds (#764)
localstack/docs: content/en/user-guide/aws/rds/index.md

---
title: "Relational Database Service (RDS)"
linkTitle: "Relational Database Service (RDS)"
description: >
  Get started with Relational Database Service (RDS) on LocalStack
---

## Introduction

> RDS (Relational Database Service) is a managed database service provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS) that allows users to setup, operate, and scale relational databases in the cloud. RDS allows you to deploy and manage various relational database engines like MySQL, PostgreSQL, MariaDB, and Microsoft SQL Server. RDS handles routine database tasks such as provisioning, patching, backup, recovery, and scaling.

Reviewer: not sure it's a good idea to outline this here, because LocalStack doesn't support this currently:
> backup, recovery, and scaling

Author: Its just for an intro to AWS RDS, not LocalStack's implementation :)

LocalStack supports RDS via the Pro/Team offering, allowing you to use the RDS APIs in your local environment to create and manage RDS clusters and instances for testing & integration purposes. The supported APIs are available on our [API coverage page](https://docs.localstack.cloud/references/coverage/coverage_rds/), which provides information on the extent of RDS's integration with LocalStack.

## Getting started

This guide is designed for users new to RDS and assumes basic knowledge of the AWS CLI and our [`awslocal`](https://github.com/localstack/awscli-local) wrapper script.

Start your LocalStack container using your preferred method. We will demonstrate the following with the AWS CLI:

1. Creating an RDS cluster.
2. Generating a `SecretsManager` secret containing the database password.
3. Executing a basic `SELECT 123 query` through the RDS Data API.

LocalStack's RDS implementation also supports the [RDS Data API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/data-api.html), which allows executing data queries against RDS clusters over a JSON/REST interface. 

### Create an RDS cluster

> To create an RDS cluster, you can use the [`CreateDBCluster`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/APIReference/API_CreateDBCluster.html) API. The following command creates a new cluster with the name `db1` and the engine `aurora-postgresql`. The cluster will be created with a single instance, which will be used as the master instance. The instance will be created with the default username `test` and password `test`.

Reviewer: > The instance will be created with the default username `test` and password `test`
IMO we should not outline this here, for a few reasons. 

- The sample below actually sets a username + password (which is different from the default) and it might confuse people. 
- In general it's not possible to leave the fields blank for the real AWS, so I think we shouldn't promote non-parity behavior.
- For some databases (MySQL + MSSQL) we spin up the official images which will not work with the defaults (for MySQL this just changed recently, and we rely on the user setting a valid user-password combination).

    "port": "4510"
}
EOF
{{< / command >}}

Run the following command to create the secret:

{{< command >}}
$ awslocal secretsmanager create-secret \
    --name dbpass \
    --secret-string file://mycreds.json
{{< / command >}}

You should see the following output:

```json
{
    "ARN": "arn:aws:secretsmanager:us-east-1:000000000000:secret:dbpass-cfnAX",
    "Name": "dbpass",
    "VersionId": "fffa1f4a-2381-4a2b-a977-4869d59a16c0"
}
```

### Execute a query

To execute a query, you can use the [`ExecuteStatement`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/APIReference/API_ExecuteStatement.html) API. The following command executes a query against the database. The query returns the value `123`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure to replace the `secret-arn` with the arn from the secret you just created in the previous step. 
Also check that the `resource-arn` matches the cluster-arn that you have created before.
```

1.  Establish a database instance and obtain the corresponding host and port information.
2.  Connect to the database using the master username and password. Subsequently, generate a new user and assign the `rds_iam` role as follows:
    -   `CREATE USER <username> WITH LOGIN`
    -   `GRANT rds_iam TO <username>`
3.  Create a token for the `<username>` using the `generate-db-auth-token` command.
4.  Connect to the database utilizing the user you generated and the token obtained in the previous step as the password.

### Create a database instance

The following command creates a new database instance with the name `mydb` and the engine `postgres`. The database will be created with a single instance, which will be used as the master instance.

{{< command >}}
$ MASTER_USER=hello
$ MASTER_PW='MyPassw0rd!'
$ DB_NAME=test
$ awslocal rds create-db-instance \
    --master-username $MASTER_USER \
    --master-user-password $MASTER_PW \
    --db-instance-identifier mydb \
    --engine postgres \
    --db-name $DB_NAME \
    --enable-iam-database-authentication \
    --db-instance-class db.t3.small
{{< / command >}}

### Connect to the database

> You can retrieve the hostname and port of your created instance either from the preceding output or by using the [`DescribeDbInstances`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/APIReference/API_DescribeDBInstances.html) API. Run the following command to connect to the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can retrieve the hostname and port of your created instance either from the preceding output or by using the [`DescribeDbInstances`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/APIReference/API_DescribeDBInstances.html) API. Run the following command to retrieve the host and port of the instance:
```

You can now connect to the database utilizing the user you generated and the token obtained in the previous step as the password:

{{< command >}}
$ PGPASSWORD=$TOKEN psql -d $DB_NAME -U myiam -w -p $PORT -h $HOST
{{< / command >}}

## Global Database Support

LocalStack extends support for [Aurora Global Database](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/AuroraUserGuide/aurora-global-database.html) with certain limitations:

- Creating a global database will result in the generation of a single local database. All clusters and instances associated with the global database will share a common endpoint.
- It's important to note that clusters removed from a global database lose their ability to function as standalone clusters, differing from their intended behavior on AWS.
- At present, the capability for persistence within global databases is not available.

## Resource Browser

The LocalStack Web Application provides a Resource Browser for managing RDS instances and clusters. You can access the Resource Browser by opening the LocalStack Web Application in your browser, navigating to the **Resources** section, and then clicking on **RDS** under the **Database** section.

> <img src="rds-resource-browser.png" alt="RDS Resource Browser" title="RDS Resource Browser" width="900" />

Reviewer: For me the image is not showing in the preview (only showing the "alt" text):
https://localstack-docs-preview-pr-764.surge.sh/user-guide/aws/rds/#resource-browser. In the console it states `Image corrupt or truncated`. 
Could it have something to do with the preview? Because on the same deployment I see this error for the cloudwatch docs as well, but on our official, released docs it works just fine 🤔

Author: Works fine on my end

![image](https://github.com/localstack/docs/assets/47351025/40b057ae-55b9-4df3-bc3e-0741fd930977)
